the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
okay so we have you can show the answer
57%
one in three so this is where we were at
the end of last lecture so if you didn't
get this written down in your notes you
want to look at these definitions so
here in this we have nh3 with its lone
pair and it is acting as the lewis base
and bf3 is acting as the Lewis acid so a
Lewis base donates its lone pair
electrons and the acid accepts them so
what was the other definition we had the
bronsted-lowry does someone want to tell
me what that definition was let's can
you we have a volunteer tell us the
bronsted-lowry definition pull out your
notes okay
somewhat there you go
so a bronsted-lowry I'm not sure it's on
it is on
okay bronsted-lowry base is something
that accepts h+ or HT opens yeah so the
base accepts the hydrogen ion or the
proton and the acid donates so is this
definition now incompatible or they
completely opposite or could they be
sort of work together does anyone have
an opinion on that so how many people
think that these could be consistent
definitions in some way okay
Oh quite a few people that that one
could make that argument so if you know
now that you can make the argument does
someone want to try to make it we have a
bag all right our mic went away but can
we get up get up over there so where did
our mic runner go I should have
explained they were needed twice all
right
alright who said try all bronsted-lowry
basis or lewis bases but not all the way
spaces our bronsted-lowry bases because
you can like to act as a proxy with no
hydrogen ion if it connects directly but
like if a hydrogen ion bonds an example
h3o - the lone pair of an oxygen then
it's the same thing as a lewis base ok
so so that's right the the Lewis acid
Lewis base definition works if you don't
have a hydrogen ion involved or a proton
involved but the other still still
applies so remember that when you're
accepting H+ you're taking it without an
electron so the base is taking h plus so
it's donating its electrons to form the
bond and the acid when it gives up H+
it's keeping all of the electrons it's
accepting the electrons so in the acid
gives up H+ it's accepting and when the
base takes h+ it's using its electrons
so the so the Lewis definitions are lone
pair or electron centric definitions
whereas bronsted-lowry is thinking about
the proton but they both kind of work
together so that's a good review of of
the definitions we talked about last
time and now I'll try to get my mic back
on alright so today we're gonna continue
talking about acid base and we're going
to continue talking about acid base
quite a bit so we have a couple we have
a number of more lectures on acid base
so we're gonna start today with the
relationship between PK w ph and poh
we're going to talk about the strengths
of acids and bases and then we're going
to start doing problems equilibrium
acid-base problems and we're going to do
a bunch of those
and students always who are doing this
and learning it for the first time are
telling me there is an infinite number
of different kinds of problems it's
really not true there are only five
different types and today hopefully
we'll get through two of them so first
we need to think about water because
water is really important solvent when
we're talking about acid-base
equilibrium and we mentioned last time
that water can act as an acid and a base
does anyone remember what that's called
something that can act as an acid in the
base amphoteric so here we have we can
think about two waters going to h3o plus
and Oh H we could also write it out
instead of just saying two waters one
water that's acting as the acid and
another water is acting as a base so the
water that's acting as an acid gives up
its a hydrogen ion or proton to the base
the base accepts it forming a conjugate
acid and this water that lost h plus
becomes OAH minus so water plus water
h2o plus h2o forms an acid and a base so
we can ask the question then how much
water is in a glass of water or how much
h2o is actually in this water container
that I have here so when I'm asking that
question how much h2o in a container of
water I am and if I know the Delta G
naught of that process I'm asking about
what is the relationship between our
products here are ionized acid and our
base over here the ionized products of
water compared to water at equilibrium
because this container the water is in
equilibrium so if I'm asking about the
ratio of products to reactants at
equilibrium what am i asking about just
yell it out
I'm asking about the equilibrium
constant exactly I'm asking what is K
what is the equilibrium constant so
let's just briefly review the
relationship we're given here at Delta G
naught and we're asking about K what is
the relationship how do you calculate K
if you know Delta G naught and we have
some equations that will be given to you
sorry
not quite yet there's going to be a
clicker question coming we have some
equations here so we have Delta G naught
equals minus RT natural log of K which
we can rearrange to solve for K and
let's just have a little reminder of
what these terms are so we'll put this
up here T is temperature and we're going
to be talking about room temperature
this is at room temperature now and in
fact almost all acid-base problems are
going to be at room temperature there
might be a few differences but we have a
lot at room temperature we have a
constant R and so three 8.314 joules per
Kelvin per mole and Delta G so we were
we were already told the value for Delta
G here now thinking about this room
temperature this constant and this value
for Delta G do you expect a larger
s'more value for K if you have this
Delta G naught value and that's our
clicker question
alright let's just to ten more seconds
yep so Kay you would expect to be a
small value less than one and you could
think about that mathematically from
these expressions or you could think
about it in terms of the value for Delta
G so if we solve this and we put in our
value for Delta G naught which is a
positive value so the forward direction
of the reaction is non-spontaneous so we
put in our positive Delta G naught and
our other values here and this is again
joules per Kelvin per mole and we have
to make sure that we convert kilojoules
to joules and our units will cancel out
and if we do that we get this value for
natural log of K and this value for K of
1.0 times 10 to the minus 14th at room
temperature and you will find that you
end up memorizing this value if you do
enough acid-base problems in fact you
might have it memorized already okay so
this is in fact a small value and that
indicates that only a small proportion
of water molecules are ionized about one
molecule in every 200 million are
ionized so it's a very very small value
so there is a lot of h2o in a glass of
water
so in here it's mostly h2o very few
molecules are ionized in that now part
of the reason why you're likely to have
this value of K memorized is because it
has a special name this K is called KW
for water so that's easy to remember and
kW the equilibrium constant for water is
equal to the hydronium ion concentration
times the hydroxide ion concentration
and since this is an equilibrium
constant if you're at constant
temperature at room temperature this
will always equal 1.0 times 10 to the
minus 14 this product is always going to
be this
at room temperature and that is why it's
going to turn out to be important
because you're going to use that
information in solving a lot of problems
all right so if this is an equilibrium
constant we want to think again about
expressions for equilibrium and just
make a note that we did not include
water squared on the bottom of this
expression so K W equals hydronium ion
concentration times hydroxide ion
concentration you don't put it over
water and the reason for this is because
this is a pretty pure solvent and you
don't include pure solvents in your
equilibrium expression you also don't
include solids so we talked about that
when we were talking about solubility so
you have to remember that solvents like
water is nearly pure doesn't go in pure
other liquids pure other solids are not
included in your equilibrium expression
all right so we now know about water
know about K W let's do a few more
definitions and then think about how all
these terms are related to each other so
a definition that many people already
know probably if you take in any kind of
science before you're probably aware
that pH equals minus log of the
hydronium ion concentration of h3o plus
if you don't know it it will be on your
equation sheet so it doesn't really
matter but there it is and there's also
Poh Poh equals minus log of the
hydroxide ion concentration o h- now
let's think about the relationships of
PK w pH and Poh so relationships so I
just told you and maybe you've already
memorized that kW is going to be equal
to the hydronium ion concentration times
the hydroxide ion concentration and
that's going to be equal to 1.0 times 10
to the minus 14th at room temperature so
now if we take this expression and we
take the log of all of these terms and
supply by a negative value then we will
get this expression so minus log of kW
is PK w and minus log of the hydronium
ion concentration is what pH minus log
of the hydroxide ion concentration is
what here H so he K W equals pH plus Poh
and that is equal to fourteen point zero
zero at room temperature and this is a
very useful expression the fact that pH
and Poh are equal to 14 if you know one
of these then you know the other one by
doing a simple subtraction so you will
find yourself using this expression
quite often in the problem sets and so
I'll say that one the problem set that's
due on Friday has just a couple of acid
based problems at the end the next
problem set will be a hundred percent
acid based problem so there's a lot lot
to look forward to okay so let's talk
about the strengths of acids and bases
so if you have a ph of pure water it
should be equal to minus log times one
point one point zero times ten to the
minus seven or the ph equals seven which
is a neutral ph so if we have a scale
here ph minus one to ph 14-7 is a
neutral value if we're talking about
things that are acidic the pH of an
acidic solution is less than 7 and so
this is the acidic part over here and
the pH of a basic solution is greater
than seven so that is down in this part
the EPA defines waste as corrosive if
the pH is lower than three
so that would be corrosive or higher
than 12.5 also corrosive so living
creatures like to be more in the neutral
range when you get to things a very low
pH or very high pH that is less good
so let's now check out a few ph's and
I'd like to have five TAS come down to
help me with this and I'll just show you
what we're going to do so we'll have
some volunteers we have pH paper the pH
paper has an indicator on you put the
paper in the solution and then try to
see which thing matches best so this is
a very quick and dirty way to estimate
pH theirs pH maid meters and indicator
dyes that work better but you'll will
have five people measure five things we
have ammonia a cleaner we talked about
the importance of cleaning bathrooms
last lecture we have soda
we have vinegar which is often used in
salad dressings before I came here I
just went to a random sink and got some
MIT water to measure and then this this
is special this is a prescription
medicine so this is a solution of iron
ii sulfate and this is prescribed if
your iron have an iron deficiency an
iron deficiency is pretty bad and a lot
of kids have iron deficiencies it's
really common in infants so my daughter
had an iron deficiency and this was her
medicine in fact this box is completely
full of this medicine so kids cannot
swallow pills very easily how many of
you actually cannot swallow a pill a lot
of adults are pill challenged you may be
how many are happy swallowing pills
let's do a more positive thing okay so
swallowing pills is not everyone's
favorite
when you're a kid it's really impossible
to tell someone to like put something in
their throat and like go back and try to
get it down like they choke to spit up
it's awful so kids have to take medicine
and solution so this medicine is 300
milligrams in five milliliters it's very
concentrated my daughter had a pretty
severe iron deficiency so when she tried
taking it and I tasted it it was
horrific beyond belief and after she had
taken a couple times she started to have
sores on her tongue and in her mouth and
I as a chemist said let's measure the pH
so you will measure the pH of this
prescription medicine for a
four-year-old and tell me whether the
EPA would approve it or not anyway so
here are the TAS and they're gonna come
around raise your hand if you're willing
to measure a pH TAS just grab a solution
I should have had you pour it but okay
they're doing it and we'll go around and
we'll measure and I will tell me what
you find and I'll write it on the board
all right so we have pH
all right do we have an answer
do we get one for what do you have
ammonia is 12 so almost corrosive but
not quite you can still have clean but
if you want an excuse not to clean your
like sorry too close to to corrosive do
we have another one
MIT water is 7 awesome
so often actually water that you get
from a tap is not seven because often
there are ions that are dissolved in it
so but a little bit around seven a
little bit of ions never hurt anyone we
have lots of ions in our body soda soda
at three and a half
so soda is definitely getting into our
corrosive range and we have vinegar a
tube and that is corrosive people often
use pure vinegar to clean out a
coffeepot because it is pretty corrosive
it really does a good job of cleaning it
when you're having it in salad dressing
you don't wanted to have it pure vinegar
that would not be good to drink and what
about medicine too okay so we also have
in the corrosive category the medicine
that my four-year-old daughter was asked
to take so when she started getting
these sores in her mouth from taking her
medicine I brought some pH paper home
and measured the pH and discovered that
what she was taking was corrosive so I
went to the doctor and said can you
prescribe something different this
medicine is corrosive and the doctor
looked at me and it's like the pH the pH
is like 2 or lower and she looked at me
and she's like what do you mean pH this
is why I spend many lectures on pH in
this class and acids and bases some of
you will be doctors and some of you will
not encourage parents to buy this much
corrosive thing to feed their child when
their iron deficient so this is what I'm
talking about and for those of you who
are not going to be doctors many of you
will probably have children with an iron
deficiency it's super common so you will
know that you need to measure the pH of
the solution before giving it to your
child so what did I do
so what I did was I bought adult pills
same stuff iron sulfate and I got made
sure that this told me the number of
milligrams that were in there I looked
at what was prescribed so I got the
pills with the correct number of
Lilla grams and then I crushed them and
that stuff also tastes really nasty but
a little tip for the future there's one
and only one that I discovered taste
that can cover the taste of iron ii
sulfate and that is nutella
so don't give your child corrosive
medicine give them crushed pills in
nutella ph is important ph is important
okay so let's talk about the strengths
of acids and you might want to
reconsider huge soda consumption - III
don't really know but that's something
you might want to think about okay
strength of acids so here we have some
acetic acid ch3cooh aqueous dissolved in
our solvent which is liquid water and
this is an acid so it will give up a
hydrogen ion or a proton to the water
which acts as a base and forms Hydra
firs our hydronium ions h3o plus and
also the conjugate base of the acid so
it's the acid missing h plus so ch3coo -
so if we're talking about the strength
of the acid what we really want to know
is how much of that acid forms ions how
much of it ionizing that is gonna make
determine how strong it is because the
amount that ionizes is equal to the
amount of the hydronium ions you get in
PH equals minus the concentration of
hydronium ions so the ph depends on the
extent to which it is and again we're
talking about an e at equilibrium so
we're talking about a equilibrium
constant and this one also gets a fancy
name in acids and bases all the
equilibrium constants
their own little names and this is the
acid ionization constant ka so it's the
equilibrium constant for an acid ka so
that's at least very easy to remember so
now based on what you know about
equilibrium constants why don't you tell
me the answer to this
all right ten more seconds
all right so this one is wrong it's
always products over reactants for an
equilibrium expression water is a
solvent and is nearly pure so it should
not be there this should be in the
expression because it's aqueous if it
were solid it wouldn't be included but
it's aqueous so it's concentration is
going to change so it is in our
expression see answer to three for that
one enough information and it's not
correct okay so we can write the
expression for K a so that's equal to
the products our hydronium ion
concentration our conjugate base over
our conjugate acid and so we can look at
what the value is for this expression
and we can look it up there's lots and
lots of tables of these in your book and
it is one point seven six times ten to
the minus five or minus three I don't
have my glasses whatever it says there I
think it's five at room temperature
which is small so when ka is small it
means that very little of it is ionizing
and so only a small number of our acid
molecules of our acetic acid molecules
are donating their proton when they're
dissolved in water so that's the
definition of a weak acid when it has a
very small ka it's not ionizing very
much now in doing these units a lot of
people get hung up on kind of the names
of the different acids and and one of
the first steps in solving a problem is
to write the equilibrium expression out
but people get hung up with that so
don't get hung up with that you can use
generic expressions for acids and water
if you don't want to write out the whole
name of the acid you can always just say
H a aqueous plus the solvent water goes
to hydronium ion ions plus a minus the
conjugate of the weak acid so this is an
acid in water and the acid is H a here
and an acid expression should be forming
hydronium ions if it's acidic you should
have
acidic ph and so you need to have some
h3o plus around you can also write this
expression as BH plus plus water BH plus
can give up the H+ and become B and also
generate hydronium ions so here the acid
is BH a and often when you're looking at
these kinds of problems a weak acid will
be H a but sometimes you have a problem
involving the conjugate acid of a weak
base and that's often expressed as BH
plus so both of these expressions are
valid for an acid in water so now let's
think about strong acids versus weaker
acids and here's our definition in this
class a strong acid has a KA greater
than one a lot of strong acids have a KA
really really really greater than one
and the acid ionized is almost
completely so if you say it's a strong
acid in water whatever concentration of
that acid you put in is going to be
equal to the concentration of hydronium
ions it basically goes straight you form
lots and lots and lots of products at
equilibrium a weak acid has a KA of less
than one and a weak acid does not form
any I&I species in solution not very
much h3o plus is formed okay so what
about PKA
PK's are really important in organic
chemistry and biology and a lot of areas
and every year the organic chemistry
faculty in 5/12 talk about PK's and
organic and the students there say no we
never learned about that they're like
you took freshman come right it's like a
gir or you passed the test
you should know about PKS and like mmm
no so they contact me and I'm like they
did not take 511 one if they do not know
what a pKa is there are other courses
that sometimes people decide to take
that are not 511 one but in
five eleven one you know about pk's so
what I want you to do is later in life
when you're in a class and pk's come up
and everyone else in the class is like I
don't know you're like I took five
eleven one I can answer that that makes
me very happy
okay so PK's so PKA is minus the log of
the KA that's easy to remember
we already talked about the relationship
of ka with strong acids or weak acids
the lower the value of the KA the higher
the value of the pKa that's just out of
that expression so the higher the PKA
means what about the acid and think
about what you know about ka to answer
this question
all right ten more seconds
all right so that is correct
so we have a weaker acid so if we have a
low ka that means that it is a weak acid
and then a higher value of ka so the
higher the KA that's going to mean so
the lower the value or the weaker of the
acid so these are just remember the
relationship from the equation and think
about it and you can think about the
value of ka products over reactants you
might have a lot of products that means
a lot of ionization is stronger acid and
fewer products that means it's weaker
okay so let's look at some tables and I
just put the values that are with the
arrows in your notes I didn't put the
entire table the tables are in the book
and this is like page one of the table
so there's a lot of values here so this
has the acid it tells you what the h8
term is what the a minus so what the
weak acid is what the conjugate base is
it gives you the KA and the PKA and so
you can see the relationship between ka
and PKA so up here H is at the top of
this table so that probably means it's
the strongest or the weakest which do
you think is this the strongest or the
weakest you're just yelling at
it is wrong it right so it has a KA
value that is much much much much much
much much much greater than 1 and it has
a very very very negative tiny-tiny PKA
value so this is a super strong acid in
fact do not use that there's no reason
really you would ever want to be using
it it is not a good thing to play with
alright so HCl is used more often in
pa-ching things is this is this a
stronger weak acid it's also strong it's
okay okay a is also greater than 1 but
not as strong as this we have 10 to the
seventh and that one gosh I should bring
my glasses 10 to the 11th
that's super strong that's still pretty
strong all right so let's look down here
now tell me is this a strong or weak
acid that is a a is less than 1 here and
I think that's like - - and the pKa
value now we're out of the negative
number so it's on the bigger side and
down here is this strong or weak also
weak and it's even weaker than this one
it's like 10 to the minus 4 and pKa
value is 3.75 so you see you can look at
the KA values and think about whether
it's a stronger weak acid you can also
look at the pKa values this is really
really small negative value this is a
bigger value down here and this is not
then the weakest acid there's a whole
nother page of tables - for acids lots
and lots of acids ok
let's bet bases there are there are a
few and you will see this base quite
often nh3 so we have a base in water the
base accepts a hydrogen ion or proton
from the water forming NH 4 plus and
then after water loses its
hydrogen ion it forms Oh H - so the
equilibrium expression or the K for this
base in water problem is called the base
ionization constant or KB and we can
write that expression here we have the
ammonium ion concentration times the
hydroxide ion concentration over the
concentration of ammonia again water is
not in the expression it stays pretty
much pure throughout this entire thing
it's the solvent and so this is our
expression for Kb and if you're writing
an expression for Kb you should always
make sure check yourself that you're
putting hydroxide ion concentration in
there if it is a base in water it should
be forming hydroxide ion concentration
if you start writing a KB and you have
hydronium ion concentration in there you
want to stop and rethink what you're
doing okay so in this case we also have
a weak base 1.8 times 10 to the minus 5
it is a small number for Kb it's a small
equilibrium number so that means your
not a lot of products not a lot ionizing
when you put this weak base in water so
only a tiny amount of nh3 ionizes 2 NH 4
plus and OAH in solution so this is they
call moderately weak base so as we saw
before you can have generic expressions
for a base in water we can write B
aqueous plus water goes to be h plus the
base accepts a hydrogen ion or proton
and the water loses one forming Oh H -
we can also write the expression that
often exists from the conjugate of a
weak base our conjugate of a weak acid
and this is a weak base
so a - plus water goes to H a plus
hydroxide ion concentration so either of
these are generic expressions that you
can write for a base in water
so in terms of the definitions it's the
same you would say a strong base is
something that ionizes almost completely
to give oh there aren't a lot of
examples of strong bases most of the
ones you'll see in your class are things
like sodium hydroxide yes that is
hydroxide that's a strong base and if
you put in water you should definitely
form a lot of hydroxide so they're not a
whole lot of examples there so we won't
they're not they're not all those tables
it's not like that it's not like the
acids all right but there are some terms
that you still need to know so PK B
equals minus log of the KB and again the
larger the value for K be the stronger
the base again it tells you you have a
lot that have ionized and because of
this relationship of this equation the
larger the key PK be the weaker of the
base because if you have a big number
here you're gonna have a small number
there all right
so now let's talk about conjugate acids
and their bases this is super important
for buffers that hopefully we'll get to
in class on Friday so the stronger the
acid the weaker its conjugate base the
stronger the base the weaker its
conjugate acid and here we have HCl
which we determined was a strong acid a
little while ago giving up its hydrogen
ion to water forming hydronium ion
concentration higher Caronia mine
concentration and cl minus c o- is not a
very good conjugate base it's not a good
base so if we look at this table when we
have a strong acid its conjugate is
going to be ineffective as a base you're
basically not pushing that equilibrium
back at all the other direction it's
completely ionized and it stays that way
but if you have a moderately
weak acid you're going to have a very
weak base a very weak acid you'll have a
moderately weak conjugate base a strong
base and you'll have something that's
ineffective as an acid so they are
inversely related to each other so let's
think about why this would be true and
this relationship holds ka times KB
equals K W and we know that K W is 1.0
times 10 to the minus 14th at room
temperature and if we put logs and then
minus logs by everything we can derive
this expression which is the pKa plus
the P KB equals the PK w equals 14 point
zero zero so you can't have an acid and
its conjugate base both be strong you
can't have a base and it's conjugate
acid both be strong the P K's need to
add up to 14 so if you have something
that's a good acid then its conjugate
base is not going to be particularly
good the PK a and the PK B must add up
to 14 if you have something that's a
good base its conjugate acid is not
going to be that good so these are
connected to each other so we can think
about then the strong acids and the
strong bases again so we talked about
equilibrium but really this is pushing
the equilibrium pretty much to
completion if it's a strong acid in
water however much strong acid you put
in is how much hydronium ion
concentration you get out a strong base
is going to give you that amount of
hydroxide ion concentration strong acids
and bases push the equilibrium pretty
much completely toward ionization you
know you had these numbers of 10 to the
11th 10 to the seventh these are hugely
over here we're forming almost ionizing
completely now for weak acid
and basis it's very different here the
equilibrium you are going back and forth
you have this dynamic equilibrium the
acid and water is forming hydronium ions
and an a- but a - is also a somewhat
good weak base pushing the equilibrium
back the other way so in this case we
have a back-and-forth between the
forward and the reverse so if you have
very weak you have moderate you've
moderate you have very weak and this is
what's important for forming buffers and
buffers are really important okay let's
see if we can get to one of these types
of problems because there five we need
to get to in this unit and and there are
only five and people will say salt and
water is another but salt water just
breaks down into weak acid and weak
bases so everyone can learn how to do
five types of problems so this is very
doable all right so let's just look at
equilibrium of weak acids and we'll save
weak bases for last time so a weak acid
is vitamin C and I brought some vitamin
C here I tried to do a demo once and
discovered that vitamin C is it's really
coded well so it does not dissolve until
it hits the acid of your stomach so I
could not dissolve it so I'll just hold
this up right here but if we had a 500
milligram tablet which i think is what
this is and if I had a hundred mils of
water and if this wasn't coated so
there's no way you can dissolve it then
I could calculate the pH so how am I
going to do this I'm given the KA I'm
told I'm told the number of milligrams
and I'm told the volume of water so the
first thing you want to do is calculate
molarity so you have what you want to
convert grams to moles or milligrams to
grams to moles and then you want to use
your volume and we have a hundred mils
but we're gonna do molarity so we want
to convert milliliters to liters and we
can calculate 0.028 for molar
as per liter then we can write our
expression and if you want to you can
just write H a here and a - you don't
have to write out the whole thing if you
don't want to alright so here is the
expression again now just as we saw with
chemical equilibrium we can write this
table talking about the initial molarity
so we have a weak acid we have no
hydronium ion concentration we have no
weak conjugate base over here so the
change then is going to be the constant
the molarity that we had and these are
change in molarity so don't put it don't
put moles or other things here molarity
here - X that's what you have at
equilibrium plus X plus X so we can
write our expression now for ka we're
given the value for ka and we know how
to write an expression we have our
hydronium ion concentration or conjugate
base over here over our conjugate acid
this is equal to x squared zero point
zero two eight four minus X now if you
want to with these problems you can make
an assumption that X is going to be
small and then not have to use the
quadratic equation but you do need to
check your assumption but I'll show you
how to do it with an assumption so we're
going to assume X is small and this
value the X will drop out so we can
rewrite this expression as x squared
over just the concentration we started
with and then we can solve for X and X
in that case is point zero zero one five
one but really two significant figures
or ka is just two now we can check the
assumption and we're going to check the
assumption that this is in fact small
and if it's less than five percent then
we can use that so here this is the X we
calculated here is the amount times a
hundred percent gives us five point
three percent which is more than five
five is the match
number four the course and so then we
have to use the quadratic equation now a
lot of you probably have calculators
that you that can work the quadratic
equation so you don't really care but if
you want to check the assumption you can
and sometimes will need to check it so
this value this percent here is
sometimes called percent ionization
because it's x over the amount you
started with it's the percent that
ionized or percent deprotonated if this
is an acid it's the amount of hydronium
the amount that you protonated over what
you started with so sometimes you're
asked to do this even if you're not
checking any assumptions all right so
we've got to end with it if the clicker
question we get here this is really two
significant figures so why don't you
tell me how many significant figures are
in your answer for pH
all right ten more seconds
hmm okay so let's take a look at the
answer here so there's the answer
so this had two significant figures
which means you get two significant
figures after the decimal point so maybe
we'll have one of these in the clicker
competition on Friday and we'll do a
week basis next time so again we've been
studying acid-base and there are only
five types of acid-base problems
weak acid in water which we already did
check weak base in water which we're
going to do right now and as soon as
we're done doing weak base in water I'm
going to explain to you how salts and
water are just weak acid in water a weak
base in water problems so you're ready
to know how to do them as soon as I
teach you about weak bases and then
we're gonna move on and do buffers and
then next week we're going to do strong
acids and strong bases and then you'll
have all five you already have enough
that you can after today's lecture you
can do I think all the problem set seven
except for the last two questions I
believe or at least a large fraction of
problem set seven I will warn you that
acid-base problems take a lot of a lot
of writing and a lot of time to work one
problem often has like five or six parts
to it and they're all time-consuming
parts pretty much so don't leave problem
set seven to the last minute that would
be a mistake on this particular problem
set okay weak bases acid base type
problem too so in this example we have
ammonia NH ammonia nh3 in water and we
measured the pH of some solutions before
and saw they were basic we had a peach I
think 12 last time and so this conjugate
base goes to a con
get acid so the base accepts a hydrogen
ion or proton from water becomes NH four
plus and the water that lost its
hydrogen ion becomes Oh H minus and that
is a base in water problem because
you're forming hydroxide ions for a base
in water you're talking about the
equilibrium constant for that base in
water which has a special name KB B for
base and it's important to remember the
A's and the B's on the equilibrium
constant because it's always checking
your work is this a base in water
problem people sometimes try to apply
Kas when they should be doing KB so pay
attention to base and water we're
thinking about KB so here if we're going
to calculate the pH of a solution we
have molarity of 0.15 and room
temperature pretty much everything's at
room temperature so whenever you're
asked to calculate the pH of a weak base
in water you want to think about at
equilibrium what's the condition now
what will be the condition what's the
change in what will be the condition in
equilibrium and so you can make this
table you can write out the expression
again you can forget about water waters
are solvent it's not going to be showing
up and then put in our initial molarity
0.15 and we put zeros in the other
categories and oh why don't you try the
rest
is it slowing down okay
all right let's just do ten more seconds
yep excellent Sam told me everyone
responded really quickly so that is in
fact what you're going to do we'll put
that up here as well so we lose some of
this minus X so at equilibrium we have
0.15 minus X and we get plus X here and
plus X there now we can write our KB for
our base in water its products the
conjugate acid NH four plus times the
concentration of hydroxide ions over NH
three again water is the solvent it's
not in the equation and then we can
write out this is X that's X so we have
x squared and then the change in the
amount of the weak base when it's in
water is 0.15 minus X so at this point
you can either use the quadratic
equation or you can make an assumption
that X is going to be small compared to
0.5 we don't want to make the assumption
up here we want to get to this point
before we try the assumption and you
always need to check your assumptions to
make sure they are correct but if we use
the Assumption here just to simplify the
math and so the assumption is that this
X is small so we can drop that X minus X
out and then we can calculate that X is
point zero zero one six four and then we
can check the assumption and that is
another clicker question
all right ten more seconds
all right it is number one so here
you're checking the assumption and the
way that you check the assumption is
that you put X that you've calculated by
simplifying it divide it by the number
that you're asking is it smaller than
and then times a hundred because our
rule is five percent so if this value is
greater than five percent of this value
you need to use the quadratic if it's
less than five percent then you can go
ahead and use your assumption and so
this is the assumption we're talking
about that this number is under five
percent and for acids and bases weak
acids and bases it very often is less
than five percent because they're weak
so there's not a lot of ionization and
this is often referred to as percentage
ionization as well all right so our
checking assumption again that X point
zero zero one six four divided by 0.15
time a hundred percent is one percent
one point one and that's less than five
so the assumption is okay and then we
can calculate Poh because this is a weak
base in water so the X that we
calculated is the amount of hydroxide
ion in solution so we calculate Poh and
we get two point seven nine and that's
two significant figures everything we
had after the decimal because everything
that we had was two significant figures
and so this is two significant figures
two significant figures after the
decimal point and then you need to
calculate pH because the problem asks
for pH so this is again at room
temperature so we can use fourteen minus
two point seven nine is eleven point two
one that's our pH and don't make the
mistake of stopping here forgetting that
X is hydroxide ion instead of hydronium
ion and tell me that the pH of my weak
base in solution is pH two so one of the
things that's really good about this
unit is that there's some good checks
that you've got the right answer at the
end if you're talking about a base in
solution you should have a pH above what
value about seven so it should be on the
basic side of neutral pH seven is
neutral so it should be above seven and
so if this was your answer that for pH
that wouldn't make a lot of sense so
always check at the end and it's fine if
you get to an exam and you get to the
end and you did something wrong and you
realize that your answer doesn't make
any sense if you write this answer
doesn't make any sense but I don't have
time to figure out what I gave wrong you
will get points for recognizing that
that is not a valid answer because it's
a weak acid problem and you have a basic
ph or vice versa
so keep that in mind there's lots of
partial credit grading acid-base
problems on exams is a whole new fun
adventure that the TAS have no idea what
they're what what what is going to be
happening but I'll be right with you
there for 10 hours of grading and we'll
have a good time right neatly please
you